in this video and in the video after
this one I want to tell you about some
of the practical tricks for making
gradient descent work well in this video
I want to tell you about an idea called
feature scaling here's the idea if you
have a problem where you have multiple
features if you make sure that the
features are on a similar scale by which
I mean make sure that the different
features take on similar ranges of
values then gradient descent can
converge more quickly concretely let's
say you have a problem with two features
where x1 is the size of Houston takes on
values between say 0 to 2000 and x2 is
the number of bedrooms and maybe that
takes on values between 1 and 5 if you
plot the contours of the cost function J
of theta then the contours may look like
this where let's see J of theta is a
function of parameters theta 0 theta 1
and theta 2 I'm going to ignore theta 0
so let's forget about theta 0 and
pretend as a function of only theta 1
and theta 2 but if X 1 can take on a
much larger range of values in X 2 it
turns out that the contours of the cost
function J of theta can take on this
sort of a very very skewed elliptical
shape except that with a sort of mm to 5
ratio it can be even more skewed so this
is very very tall and skinny ellipses or
these very tall skinny ovals can form
the contours of the cost function J of
theta and if you've run gradient descent
on this sort of cost function your
gradients may end up taking a long time
and can sort of oscillate back and forth
and they can take a long time before we
can finally find this way to the global
minimum in fact you'd imagine if these
contours are exaggerated even more able
to draw your incredibly skinny tall
skinny contours and it can be even more
extreme than that then you know gradient
descent can just well it turns out
gradient descent we just have a much
harder time taking us way meandering
around you can take a long time to find
this way to the global minimum
in these settings a useful thing to do
is to scale the features concretely if
you instead define the feature x1 to be
the size of the house divided by 2,000
and define x2 to be maybe the number of
bedrooms divided by 5 then the contours
of the cost function J can become much
more much less skew so the contours may
look more like circles and if you run
gradient descent on the cost function
like this then gradient descent you can
show mathematically you can find a much
more direct path to the global minimum
rather than taking a much more
convoluted path we're sort of trying to
follow a much more complicated
trajectory to get to the global minimum
so by scaling the feature is so that
they're taken similar ranges of values
in this example we end up with both
features x1 and x2 between 0 & 1 you can
wind up with an implementation of
gradient descent they can converge much
faster more generally when we're
performing feature scaling what we often
want to do is get every feature into a
proximately a minus 1 to +1 range and
concretely you know your feature x0
that's always equal to 1 so that's
already in that range but you may end up
dividing other features by different
numbers to get them into this range and
the numbers minus 1 and +1 on two
important so if you have a feature x1
that winds up being between 0 and 3 say
that's not a problem review end up
having a different feature that winds up
being between you know minus 2 and
positive 0.5 again this is close enough
to minus 1 and plus 1 that you know
that's fine that's fine
as only if you have a different feature
say x3 that is between say their ranges
from minus 100 to plus 100 then you know
this is a very different range of values
than minus 1 and plus 1 so so this might
be a less
scale feature and similarly if your
features take on a very very small range
of values so if x4 takes on values
between minus 0.0001 and positive 0.0001
then again this thing's on a much
smaller range of values than the minus 1
to +1 range and again I would consider
this feature wholly scaled so you want
the range of values you know it can be a
bit bigger than plus 1 is smaller than
plus 1 but just not much bigger like
plus 100 here and not too much smaller
like 0.001 over there different people
have different rules of thumb but the
one that I use is that if a feature
takes on the range of values from say
minus 3 to plus 3 I usually think that
should be just fine
but maybe if it takes on much larger
values than plus 3 or minus VMs not to
worry and if it takes on values from say
minus one third to one third you know I
think that's fine too or zero to one
third of the minus one third to zero or
just that's that's typical range of
values cycle zero okay but if it takes
on a much tinier range of values like x4
here and then again on might start to
worry so the take-home message is don't
worry if your features are not exactly
on the same scale or exactly in the same
range of values but so long as they're
all close enough to this gradient
descent should work okay in addition to
dividing by so that the maximum value
when performing feature scaling
sometimes people will also do what's
called mean normalization and what I
mean by that is that you might take a
feature X I and replace it with X I
minus mu I to make your features have
approximately zero mean and obviously we
won't apply this to the feature x0
because the feature x0 is always equal
to one so it cannot have an average of
value of 0 but concretely for other
features if the range of sizes of a
house takes on values between zero to
two thousand and if you know the average
size of a house is equal to one thousand
then you might use this formula size set
the feature x1 to the size minus the
average value
/ mm and similarly if you know on
average if your houses have one to five
bedrooms and if number of and if on
average a house has say two bedrooms
then you might use this formula to mean
normalize the your second feature x2 in
both of these cases you therefore wind
up with features x1 and x2 they can take
on values roughly between minus point 5
and positive point five forms a key not
true x2 can actually be slightly larger
than point five but you know close
enough and the more general rule is that
you might take a feature x1 and replace
it with X 1 minus nu 1 over s 1 where to
define these terms nu 1 is the average
value of x1 in the training set and s1
is the range of values of that feature
and by range I mean let's say the
maximum value minus the minimum value or
for those of you that know what the
standard deviation of a variable is
setting s1 to be the standard deviation
of the variable would be fine too but
taking you of this max minus min would
be fine and similarly for the second
feature x2 you replace x2 with this are
sort of subtract the mean of the feature
and divided by the range of values
meaning the max minus min and this sort
of formula will get your features you
know maybe not exactly but maybe roughly
into these sorts of ranges and by the
way for those of you that are being
super careful technically if we're
taking the range as max minus min this 5
here will actually become a four so that
if max is five minutes one then a range
of bedroom values is actual equal to
four but all of these are approximate
and any value that gets the features
into anything close to these sorts of
ranges will do fine and the the feature
scaling doesn't have to be too exact in
order to get gradient descent to run
quite a lot faster
so now you know about feature scaling
and if you apply the simple trick
it can make gradient descent run much
faster and converge in a lot fewer
iterations that was feature scaling in
the next video I'll tell you about
another trick to make gradient descent
work Wow in practice